From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman. It's
our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 97. Recorded live
Thursday, December 15th, 2011. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by Telerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode of
the framework series has got
talks with Apple stylist, Becky
Aras from Navix breaths about
the expand framework. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes
today. He's going to be
talking to me about the
expand framework. It's an open
source project and it will
be part of the ongoing
framework series. Yeah. Hi, how's
it going? Hi, you created
this kind of on your
own before you worked for
dev express, is that correct?
Yeah, it was at the
beginning and it went well,
although I wasn't much of
a fan of open source
projects at the beginning, I
was, I believe that the
power that we gave such
projects that why were you
not a fan? And what
was it that took you
to change your mind and
realize that the framework was
better off opensource? I believe
that they think that shouting
their efforts for free, however,
is not the case because
most of us freelance developers
always are changing, changing, changing,
changing the way get paid,
even if they work, eh,
eh, eh, eh, they get
this from the pastor and
the dishes, nothing. If they
tried to publicize their work
automatically dish published, it gives
them the value they want
for data, eh, war. And
at least from my experience,
there will be a raise
in a salary. Why were
you initially not a fan
of open source? And when
you created this framework, did
you do it a closed
source and then change your
mind and then open it
up? No, initially I wasn't
afraid. I was afraid that
I would spend too much
of my time and I
wouldn't see that awards. I
couldn't see them at the
time, but after I started
initially I started with a
blog and I was a
freelance lag, like most of
her development shelf that, so
I was changing projects and
the friend told me, Hey,
why don't you try blogging
and expose your ideas to
the party that draw attention
to your ideas. And this
is what I did. And
I was amazed how fast
this blow became popular. And
eh, I was also amazed
about the strong bond that
I Greg with my, eh,
eh, eh, eh, eh, I
decided to that the decide
framework and eventually built this
framework with better support. This
is how we started. I
said, I found if you
like mine, like mine, guys,
everything seemed to follow to
a place that had the
next shape, the best 10
blogs or something after that.
And I helped them and
we have a very healthy
collaboration right now. One of
the things that I think
is interesting about this particular
framework, and in fact, we're
going to talk to the
Tellerik guys next week about
a framework that they did
is that expand framework is
built on the dev express
X a F framework. So
this is an open source
framework that's built on top
of another framework. Does the
dev express framework cost money?
And then you have an
open source framework that's built
on top of a framework
that costs money. Is that
how that works? Exactly. Yes.
Dev expresses a convention as
everybody knows, but expound framework
is open source and the
tree and the problem that
most of people have with
open shores is that it's
very obese. They cannot trust
open shores because they say,
okay, this is a guy
smart guy. And the builds
up. What if something happens
to this guy? What, how
can we follow this guy?
How she develops the point
with is that it's not
my effort. We are, eh,
eh, we've built a framework
framework. That means that
we have a documentation and
well documented, eh, eh, dev
express framework. We all read
this documentation. And from the
entry points that the XAF
is called the dev express
framework that we are based
upon from the victimization. It's
very easy to put, extends
the framework. And if we
have problems or bugs or
onshore onshore stuff, we cannot
rely to dev express support
center, which is the best
Shabbat there in the market
right now. So he's used
to rely on experience instead
if I compare it with
the other framework, here's my
point. Okay. And how do
you control what you think
belongs in your framework versus
what should be in the
commercial part of the framework?
Because what's interesting about this
is that you started the
project it's led by you
and there's other people in
the community that work on
it with you. You did
this community, you did this
project yourself without dev express.
Then you ended up going
to work for dev express
as an evangelist. How do
you decide and keep separate
what goes in your open
source version of this and
what goes in the product?
Yes, sure. This shit, the
thing is that dev express
is a mentor for development.
On the other side, we
are developers that we are
building software for our facelifts.
Now XAF is the base
framework, expand our framework, extend
this. Now we build software
for the business. So we
let's say we have a,
a business that targets doctors.
So we built this set
of features for doctors. It's
very easy to go to
the modularized architecture of the
framework to shop, meet that.
And for the making our
work more testable from other
users. And at the end,
we do not share the
shale market. For example, I
live in Greece, I sell
myself, but here I could
for a job or build
a module,  test it.
Usually make it my truth
for me, my customers want
a complain about anything because
the work is going to
be distributing through the show.
It's more about expands. It's
more about the business use
and not about development, like
they've expressed support. So there
is no, it's rare to
have a phone with that
express. And even if in
the situation we have a
phone fleet and a shade
that we rely to dev
express very  hours, which
is how it works. I
felt that make sense. Yeah,
I think so. How many
times have you made something
in the open source project
and then had the business
approached you and said, this
is really useful. I want
to make this part of
the, the core framework and
how do you, how do
you manage that? And the
reason I ask is that
this happens a lot at
Microsoft where someone will be
working on a project that
is their main project there,
it's their day job. And
then they'll have a thing
that they're doing on the
side. There's lots and lots
of examples of Microsoft employees
that do one thing in
the daytime and then do
an open source project at
night. And then every once
in a while their boss
or someone will hear about
this project they're doing at
night and say, wow, we
need to, we need to
use this. If you look
at like signal are from
Damien Edwards and David Fowler or
knockout from Steven Sanderson or
the wicks framework, I mean,
the list goes on and
on. How do you manage
deciding how you want to
move things over and keeping
your job and your open
source. And this is more
about having, it's not my
decision to manage things. So
if Shabbat has a full
module, that's a task for
a job or some kinds
of action, she can easily
contribute to the framework. So
the feedback from the community
is going through the project
and she's more junior and
eventually dev express that is
only all the community takes
the decision and say, yes,
we want to build this
module in our brain and
high quality way of building
staffs, which is how it
works for us. And have
you had them take modules?
Have you had them take
source from your open source
framework and move it into
commercial or have you had
them change it? Because sometimes
I've seen companies take an
open source, beat piece of
code and then rewrite it
entirely from scratch. They liked
the functionality, but they ended
up rewriting it. And, and
then other times I've seen
people actually just reference the
open source library and support
it. You've heard people tease
Microsoft about the term embrace
and extend. I think that
people prefer commercial companies to
support open source and depend
on it. I wonder sometimes
do you find a interdependency?
Do you find that your,
your, your frameworks depend on
each other or is it
always a matter where expand
framework sits on top of
the commercial framework? Yeah. It's
a matter of thinking Shamblin
time, state defense, sometimes they
know, but almost all the
times, if the vendor in
this case of express decides
to reimplement the feature it's
going to do exactly that
it's going to reimplement the
feature because it has the
vendor cost the process of
testing or ensuring quality show.
Most of the times it's
fresh going to demand writer,
documentation, and expand sheriffs just
as a community. And it
also is a way for
a developer to convince they've
expressed that a huge war
is booby enough to be
the core framework. And as
of now, it's over the
books, a feature. For example,
before I joined dev express,
there were many, many times
that I had the school
functionality and the wandering as
the go back their expression,
say, come on, guys, put
that do sheet. It's a
very good selection and idea,
but as you can understand
any of that though, not
the Devic stress reject, because
that has the quality, they
are a thing, shopper license,
but now if you cost
it in expand and gain
publicity and the customer base
likes the module, then it's
no way for the events
or dev express, they have
to implement it and they
have to document and they
have to be an out
of the box fit you.
Yeah. I think that the
key there of course, is
that the commercial company has
to accept, take backs. And
that's the thing that I
think Microsoft is struggling with.
And I hope that we'll,
we'll fix that. There's a
lot of examples of open
source where people have built
on top of our things,
just exactly as you described.
I think like MVC contrib
is a great example where
the community has said, if
Microsoft doesn't do something the
way that the community wants,
then we'll create a contrib
project for that. That will
move faster than the core
project. That's the other thing
that open source projects can
kind of live on the
bleeding edge. So you've got
meth contrib and MVC contrib.
It's a good way for
community members to get recognized
and get their products use,
but it only really ultimately
works if you can start
pulling in those ideas and
that code and take, take
backs into the end of
the project. And that's where
the thing about Microsoft, that
myself and others are trying
to change to make open
source, really open source and
not just source opened. How,
how open has dev express
been to actually accepting open
source into their project? And
they are not so open
right now, but as everybody
they are learning and that's
a good faith, eh, our
latest release, I'm talking about
that, but it's now expanded
in the shame menu. I'm
talking about the , that
is a fault that I
love that expression, homeowners, that
shade, extensions, so that you
can find expand and whatever
framework is going to be
created in a future. So
I think that I've now
been expressed, embrace the moon
will be development. I definitely
think that dev express and
companies like them embrace the
community, but I think that
all companies, unless they are
self identified as an open
source company, the struggle with
the, that last mile, the
last mile is that moment
when you have to pull
community code into your product
and take that, take that
risk or deal with the
ramifications of, wow, we really
are going to be an
open source company. Now we're
taking commits and we're taking
pull requests. Some companies just
do it and they don't,
they don't worry about it,
but the commercial companies seem
to really stress out about
that stuff. It's good that
you're going to keep pushing
people to, to accept open
source in a more full
way. And you have to
kind of close that, that,
that cycle. Do you think
that you'll get them to
change? Yeah. I believe that
if the open source project
is successful and has a
lower, a large user base,
then it's inevitable and that
the  worth it. We'll
walk through the open shore
show. It will want to
build the same features or
even better. I think it
comes from how successful and
how well the people collaborate
in the project. Right, right.
Cause that's a very good
point as well. Building an
open source framework is there's,
there is the, the code
that you're working on and
how good that code is,
but there's also the health
of your community and the
health of your committers and
whether or not you get
along well as a group,
I can think of a
couple of projects. I won't
name names that are great
technology, but dysfunctional groups. And
if you can't get along
with your collaborators and, and,
and work as a well
oiled machine, then you're not
really have a framework. Yeah.
But believe that at the
end, before we start our
conversation, that we had people
work for themselves. So, eh,
for the beauty something she
had, it's not something that
I will take the Gregg.
If the work is good,
they will take that. For
example, we have a
that now belong to the
MVP program of the express
because of this contribute show
show, it's all about collaboration
and teamwork. So expand framework
has all of these modules,
and there's a long list
of modules@expandframework.com that sit on
top of the XAF framework.
But I'm trying to understand,
are these modules just a
list of modules or do
they all work together? Is
the framework a bunch of
disjointed components or does it
all fit in, in a,
in a cohesive way? I
will answer this first. Let
me tell you how it
works. What is Xas? Is
that an application framework to
express that in a highly
configurable line of business applications?
So it has these great
modularize artifacts to, so at
the very well documented shied
and the framework. So what
we have to do is
to follow by the book.
So we go through the
documentation, she how to create
the black gate module gate.
We have the documentation would
build the module to Xbox
framework. Other users tested this
only everything works in it
like a fashion show that
is known to have everything
installed. The bitch, give a
shit very easy to show
if a module is not
boot then within a week
or so, the community will
reject it by giving no
value and by reporting a
lot of facts. So it's
a very black Gabler system
that targets both platforms. This
is how it works. Okay.
And when you say, you
said highly configurable is the,
is the thing that the
framework provides that is the
most useful is that it
makes business applications more, more
configurable, more flexible. Yeah. It's
based around a, an ambition
then. And eh, eh, eh,
eh, I said architects are,
so everything is described over
examined so we can, eh,
eh, or change the behavior
of your application by just
breathing examined at medicine loop
into your model. It's a
very interesting architecture and it's
a very mature because actually
right now is five years
old. And the shop that
with the no box and
hazard shoot functionality, like people
think reporting workflow targeting almost
16 different database systems show
more than the work we
do as developers at Chevy
every day, by abstracting away
the low level, a stop
gap. We ask our developers
to build applications fast and
grab some money out of
that. This is what
by just providing a domain
model. And when I'm talking
about domain more than about
adopts or the main model
by Jasper by shut off
interfaces, it is possible for
XJS to create scaffolds using
all the components of .
And we're talking about COVID
promoted and creates a face
for the group. And there
is a more than that.
You can, eh,  this
is XAF in Knutsen. Now
what expands does, it's fun
apps, ideas and frameworks using
the technology provided by access
SAS, user interfaces out of
a model. So let's talk
about a module of expands.
A module of expanding is
the word creator as the
name. So what do we
have, do we have, we
did that. And we took
the structure of ownership
properties. And we take classes
out of that class is
not say I sent in
the class name. This is
a white picture in order
to provide the user interface
show. Now we have a
user interface that the end
user, the business user can
use it to create more
classes and properties and fast
changing that domain mode. Then
this is a beautiful tool,
and this is what ever
the developer groups, because we
usually go to the client.
This is a built in
application. And then what we
don't need to go back
and add a new member
to our class as visual
studio and walk back. We
should do this shit as
rather Radisson. So with the
expanded, we tried to bring
bridge the developers with the
business world. For example, let
me talk about another, eh,
eh, eh, I don't know
if you're familiar with quads
framework is a framework that
creates jobs has three girls
about jobs. He's a very
much API. Tom's from the
Java world. Now it's for
what is missing from that
API. For me, every API,
each mission, usually that face,
I have it usually the
face I teach my abuse
rates or brake jobs and
triggers for me. I will
push the war, the war
to my administrators or show
this is what actually moves
forward and work today. And
module that, test it up,
which classes are quads and
provide that face for that.
And now everything is flexible.
I hope you say my
phone, my phone. And as
I understand it, are you,
is it true that you're
able to create both, both
UIs in, in wind and
web forms and in windows
as well? Yeah, actually IAF
is a builder. The designer
is a targeting mobile platforms
and it's very interesting. After
the age you gets used
to it, I'm sure nobody
will evolve back to traditional
programming because it makes it
makes things and teaches you
how to build the framework
and expand the proof. Well,
I'm really glad that you
came on the show to
talk to us about this.
People can check this out@expandframework.com.
They can go up at
the top. There there's a
whole list of contributors and
people that work with you
from all sorts of other
different companies. So congratulations to
those guys for all the
hard work, they can go
up and download the latest
version of span as well
as check out the source
app. Stylish. Thanks so much
for coming on the show.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes, and we'll
see you again next week.